section 5 the FBI's effort to discredit
dr. Martin Luther King 1964 introduction
and summary in December 1963 a meeting
was convened at FBI headquarters to
discuss various quote avenues of
approach aimed at neutralizing King as
an effective Negro leader end quote two
weeks later FBI agents planted the first
microphones in dr. King's hotel rooms in
an attempt to obtain information about
the private activities of dr. King and
his associates so that dr. King could be
completely discredited that same week
the head of the domestic intelligence
division recommended the promotion of a
new National Negro leader who could
overshadow King and be in the position
to assume the role of the leadership of
the Negro people when King has been
completely discredited the FBI's effort
to discredit dr. King and to undermine
the SCLC involved plans touching on
virtually every aspect of dr. King's
life the FBI scrutinized dr. King's tax
returns monitored his financial affairs
and even tried to establish that he had
a secret foreign bank account religious
leaders and institutions were contacted
in an effort to undermine their support
of him and unfavorable material was
leaked to the press Bureau officials
contacted members of Congress and
special off-the-record testimony was
prepared for the directors used before
the House Appropriations Committee
efforts were made to turn White House
and Justice Department officials against
dr. King by barraging them with
unfavorable reports and according to one
witness even offering to play for a
White House official tape recordings
that the bureau considered embarrassing
to King this chapter examines not only
the bureau's efforts to discredit dr.
King but the degree to which officials
and other branches of the government
were responsible for those actions
a few months before the FBI held its
december 1963 conference at which its
program against dr. king was apparently
formulated the director distributed a
monograph about dr. king to the heads of
several governmental agencies attorney
general kennedy ordered it immediately
withdrawn during the course of the
following year the FBI sent several
intelligence reports bearing on dr.
King's private life to the White House
and justice department although
government officials outside the FBI
were not aware of the extent of the
FBI's efforts to discredit to dr. King
officials of the Justice Department and
of the White House did know that the FBI
had offered tape recordings and
derogatory information about dr. King to
reporters the Attorney General went no
further than complaining to the
President and accepting a bureau
officials representation that the
allegations were not true President
Johnson not only failed to order the
bureau to stop but indeed cautioned it
against dealing with certain reporters
who had complained of its conduct a the
FBI disseminates the first King
monograph and Attorney General Kennedy
orders it recalled October 1963 on
October 15 1963 william sullivan
forwarded to assistant director allen
belmont for his approval a monograph
entitled communism and the negro
movement a current analysis he proposed
that it be distributed to the Attorney
General the White House CIA State
Department Defense Department and the
Defense Department intelligence agencies
Sullivan testified that the purpose of
the monograph was to discredit King
Belmont submitted the monograph to the
director with a note stating quote the
attached analysis of communism and the
Negro movement is highly explosive it
can be regarded as a personal attack on
Martin Luther King there is no doubt it
will have a heavy impact on the Attorney
General and
anyone else to whom we disseminate the
memorandum makes good reading and is
based on information from reliable
sources we may well be charged however
with expressing opinions and conclusions
particularly with reference to some of
the statements about King this
memorandum may startle the Attorney
General particularly in view of his past
association with King and the fact that
we are disseminating this outside the
department he may resent this
nevertheless the memorandum is a
powerful warning against communist
influence in the Negro movement and we
will be carrying out our
responsibilities by disseminating it to
the people indicated in the attached
memorandum end quote memorandum from
Alan Belmont to Clyde Tolson 10 1763
Hoover wrote in the margin we must do
our duty and I am glad you recognized at
last that there exists such influence
copies were sent to the Attorney General
the White House the Secretary of State
the director of Central Intelligence the
Secretary of Defense the director of
Naval Intelligence the army assistant
chief of staff for intelligence and the
Department of Special Investigations of
the Air Force the monograph was
distributed on October eighteen nineteen
sixty-three one week later the Attorney
General called Courtney Evans and stated
that he had just learned that the army
had received a copy of a report about
dr. King's alleged communists activities
Evans reported to Belmont quote he was
obviously irritated he went on to ask if
the army got copies of all reports
submitted to him the Attorney General
asked what responsibilities the army had
in relation to the Communist background
of Martin Luther King I told the
Attorney General that the army had an
interest in communist activities
particularly in relation to racial
matters because the military had to be
called on if civil disturbances arising
out of such matters went beyond the
ability of civilian authorities this
explanation seemed
serve no purpose end quote director
Hoover recorded in a memorandum of the
same date quote the Attorney General
called and advised me there was a lot of
talk at the Pentagon regarding the
document the Attorney General
anticipated that this information would
leak out as the military didn't like the
Negroes the Attorney General felt we
should get back all copies of the
document I told him we would get them
from all agencies to which they were
disseminated I also told him if any
newspapers asked about this no comment
would be made and no mention would be
made that such a document existed end
quote all copies were recovered by
October 28th Burke Marshall assistant
attorney general in charge of the Civil
Rights Division under Robert Kennedy
told the committee that the monograph
was quote a personal diatribe a personal
attack without evidentiary support on
the character the moral character and a
person of dr. Martin Luther King and it
was only peripherally related to
anything substantive like whether or not
there was communist infiltration or
influence on the civil rights movement
it was a personal attack on the man and
went far afield from the charges of
possible communist influence end quote
Burke Marshall testimony 33 76 page 32
carl t rowan then director of us IA was
sent a copy of the monograph in a
newspaper article in 1969 rowan wrote
quote perhaps this is the time for me to
reveal that i have read the FBI reports
based on electronic surveillance of the
late nobel prize winner i know how much
dirt the FBI has dug up and ninety
percent of it is barnyard gossip that
has nothing to do with internal security
or Marxist influences end quote Marshall
recalled that he had been very irritated
about the monograph and that the
Attorney General had thought it was
outrageous he remembered that the
Attorney General had ordered the
monograph withdrawn but did not know if
the Attorney General had
any further steps to reprimand the
Bureau B the FBI plans its campaign to
discredit dr. King December 23rd 1963 on
December 23rd 1963 a nine-hour
conference was held at FBI headquarters
to discuss Martin Luther King in
attendance were assistant director
Sullivan Internal Security section chief
Frederick Baumgardner three other FBI
headquarters officials and two agents
from the FBI's Atlanta field office a
prepared list of 21 proposals was
presented and discussed the proposals
raised the possibility of using
ministers disgruntled acquaintances
aggressive newsmen colored agents dr.
King's housekeeper and even suggested
using dr. King's wife or quote placing a
good-looking female plant in Kings
office end quote an account of the
meeting written by William Sullivan
emphasized that the bureau must take a
discreet approach in developing
information about dr. King for use quote
at an opportune time and a
counterintelligence move to discredit
him end quote it was generally agreed
that the bureau should make use of quote
all available investigative techniques
coupled with meticulous planning
boldness and ingenuity tempered only
with good judgment end quote but that
quote discretion must not reach the
point of timidity end quote memorandum
from William Sullivan to Alan Belmont
1224 63 six months later in april
nineteen sixty four FBI headquarters was
still instructing agents in the field to
quote continue to gather information
concerning king's personal activities in
order that we may consider using this
information at an opportune time and a
counterintelligence move to discredit
him end quote and to consider the
possibility of utilizing contracts in
the news media field Sullivan's
memorandum reported that the following
decisions were made at the conference
one we must determine and check out all
of the employees of the SCLC too we must
locate and monitor the funds of the SCLC
three we must identify and check out the
sources who contribute to the SCLC for
we must continue to keep close watch on
King's personal activities five we will
at the proper time when it can be done
without embarrassment to the bureau
expose King as an opportunist who is not
a sincere person but is exploiting the
racial situation for personal gain six
we will explore the possibility of
utilizing additional specialized
investigative techniques at the SCLC
office Sullivan described the purpose of
the meeting as quote to explore how best
to carry on our investigation to produce
the desired results without
embarrassment to the bureau included in
our discussion was a complete analysis
of the avenues of approach aimed at
neutralizing King as an effective Negro
leader and developing evidence
concerning King's continued dependence
on Communists for guidance and direction
end quote precisely what prompted the
Bureau to decide upon this drastic new
approach is still unclear William
Sullivan was asked by the committee
whether tactics such as placing female
plants or common practices of the FBI
Sullivan testified that they were quote
common practice among intelligence
services all over the world this is not
an isolated phenomenon this is a common
practice rough tough dirty business
whether we should be in it or not that
is for you folks to decide we are in it
no holds were barred we have used that
technique against Soviet agents they
have used it against us question the
same methods were brought home mr.
Sullivan brought home against any
organization against which we were
targeted we did not differentiate this
is a rough tough business senator
mondale would it be safe to say that the
techniques we learned in fighting true
espionage in world war two came to be
used against some of our own American
citizens mr. Sullivan that would be a
correct deduction end quote Sullivan
testified that the plans formulated at
the December 24th 1963 meeting were in
accord with mr. Hoover's policy after
reviewing the memoranda Sullivan
emphasized quote I want to make this
clear this is not an isolated phenomenon
that this was a practice of the bureau
down through the years I might say it
often became a real character
assassination end quote Sullivan was
asked by the committee whether he or any
other employees of the Bureau ever
objected to using these tactics Sullivan
responded quote not to my recollection I
was not ready at that time to collide
with him everybody in the division went
right along with Hoover's policy I do
not recall anybody ever raising a
question never once did I hear anybody
including myself raise the question is
this course of action which we have
agreed upon lawful is it legal is it
ethical or moral we never gave any
thought to this realm of reasoning
because we were just naturally
pragmatists the one thing we were
concerned about was will this course of
action work will it get us what we want
will we reach the objective that we
desire to reach as far as legality is
concerned morals or ethics was never
raised by myself or anybody else I think
this suggests really in government we
are amoral end quote on December 29th
1963 less than a week after the FBI
conference Time magazine chose dr. King
as the Man of the Year describing him as
the unchallenged voice of the Negro
people who has infused the Negroes them
with the fiber that gives their
revolution it's true stature Hoover
wrote across the memorandum informing
him of this honor quote they had to dig
deep in the garbage to come up with this
one end quote see William Sullivan
proposes a plan to promote a new Negro
leader january nineteen sixty four on
january sixth nineteen sixty four about
two weeks after the FBI's conference to
plan methods of neutralizing dr. King's
influence and to gather information
about dr. King's personal life the FBI
installed the microphone in dr. King's
room at the Willard hotel as explained
in the preceding chapter additional
microphones soon followed physical and
photographic surveillance was initiated
special headquarters briefings were held
dry runs were planned and the most
sophisticated and experienced Bureau
personnel were deployed to gather
information that might be used in a
concerted effort to destroy dr. King's
influence two days after the
installation of the Willard hotel
microphones assistant director William
Sullivan proposed that the FBI select a
new National Negro leader as dr. King's
successor and proposing the plan
Sullivan stated quote it should be clear
to all of us that Martin Luther King
must at some propitious point in the
future be revealed to the people of this
country and to his Negro followers as
being what he actually is a fraud
demagogue and scoundrel when the true
facts concerning his activities are
presented such should be enough if
handled properly to take him off his
pedestal and to reduce him completely in
influence when this is done and it can
be and will be done obviously much
confusion will rain particularly among
the Negro people the Negroes will be
left without a national leader of
sufficiently compelling personality to
steer them in the proper direction this
is what could happen but need not happen
if
the right kind of a national negro
leader could at this time be gradually
developed so as to overshadow dr. King
and be in the position to assume the
role of the leadership of the Negro
people when King has been completely
discredited for some months I've been
thinking about this matter one day I had
an opportunity to explore this from a
philosophical and sociological
standpoint with an acquaintance whom I
have known for some years I asked him to
give the matter some attention and if he
knew any Negro of outstanding
intelligence and ability to let me know
and we would have a discussion he has
submitted to me the name of the above
captioned person enclosed with this
memorandum as an outline of the person's
biography which is truly remarkable for
a man so young on scanning this
biography it will be seen that he does
have all the qualifications of the kind
of a negro I have in mind to advance the
positions of national leadership if this
thing can be set up properly without the
bureau in any way becoming directly
involved I think it would be not only a
great help to the FBI but would be a
fine thing for the country at large
while i am not specifying at this moment
there are various ways in which the FBI
could give this entire matter the proper
direction and development there are
highly placed contacts of the FBI who
might be very helpful to further such a
step these can be discussed in detail
later when I have probed more fully into
the possibilities end quote when
Sullivan was shown this memorandum by
the committee he testified quote I'm
very proud of this memorandum one of the
best memoranda I ever wrote I think here
i was showing some concern for the
country end quote sullivan sought the
director's approval to explore this
whole matter in greater detail the
director noted his own okay and added
quote i am glad to see that light has
finally though dismal ii delayed come to
the domestic intelligence division i
struggled four months to get over the
fact that the Communists were
over the racial movement but our experts
here couldn't or wouldn't see it end
quote it is uncertain whether the FBI
took steps to implement Sullivan's plan
the FBI files contain no additional
memoranda on the subject the successor
for dr. King proposed in Sullivan's
memorandum has told the committee that
he was never contacted by the FBI and
that he was not aware of the FBI's plans
for him or of any attempts by the FBI to
promote him as a civil rights leader d
FBI headquarters orders the field
offices to intensify efforts to
discredit dr. King April through August
1964 on April first nineteen sixty four
in response to a suggestion from the
Atlanta field office for another
conference in Washington to plan
strategy against dr. King FBI
headquarters ordered the Atlanta and New
York offices to quote give the matter of
instant investigation a thorough
analysis with a view towards suggesting
new avenues of Investigation and
intensification in areas already being
explored bear in mind the main goals of
this matter namely determining the
extent of the communist influence in
racial matters and taking such action as
is appropriate to neutralize or
completely discredit the effectiveness
of Martin Luther King jr. as a Negro
leader end quote headquarters listed
several areas having potential for
further inquiry quote possibilities of
anonymous source contacts possibilities
of utilizing contacts in the news media
field initiating discreet checks
relative to developing background
information on employees of the southern
christian leadership conference SCLC
remaining alert to the possibility of
capitalizing on any disgruntled SCLC
employee the possibility of developing
information concerning any financial
dealings of King which may be illegal
and the development of subversive
information
taining to SCLC employees end quote the
Atlanta office responded with several
ideas for quote how the effectiveness of
King can be neutralized or discredited
determining whether a rift was
developing between dr. King and Roy
Wilkins head of the n-double-a-cp and if
so using newspapers friendly to the
bureau to feed pertinent subversive
connections and dealings of King to
Wilkins furnishing too friendly
newspapers on an anonymous basis certain
specific leads where he may develop the
necessary data so that he may further
write critical news stories discreetly
investigate the background of 12 key
SCLC employees and associates in an
effort to obtain some weakness that can
be used for counterintelligence
activities injection of false
information with certain discontented
SCLC employees sending letters to scl
sees financial donors written on SCLC
stationery fabricated in the FBI
laboratory and bearing dr. King's
signature advising the donors that the
IRS was checking SCLC Stax Records it is
believed that such a letter of this type
from SCLC may cause considerable concern
and eliminate future contributions
placing a pretext call to an SCLC
creditor to impress him with the
financial plight of the SCLC so that he
may be incited into collection efforts
examining dr. King's checking accounts
and credit card accounts to develop
information about his financial affairs
making a survey to determine whether to
install a trash cover of the SCLC office
in Atlanta the Atlanta office also
assured the bureau that it would
continue to explore the possibility of
technical coverage of an Atlanta
apartment frequently used by dr. King
although coverage would involve several
security problems the FBI overcame
similar security problems in another
city where hotel room coverage of dr.
King was
tired by supplying lead information to
newsmen in order that they might
determine if they could develop
sufficient facts to cause an expose of
King shortly after these proposals were
submitted the director expressed the
bureau's gratitude to the Atlanta agents
for their quote aggressive imagination
looking toward more and better ways of
meeting the problems involved in quote
in the investigation memorandum from
director FBI to sac Atlanta for 2464 the
domestic intelligence division
ultimately approved taking preliminary
steps for possible anonymous mailings to
the newsman and to install coverage on
any new apartments that King might lease
the other suggestions were rejected
because they did not appear desirable
and or feasible for direct action by the
bureau at this time the New York office
submitted only a few new suggestions
asserting that quote it is felt that our
coverage is adequate in quote to this
the director replied quote the bureau
cannot a judge as adequate any coverage
which does not positively provide to the
bureau one hundred percent of the
intelligence relating to the communist
influence in racial matters obviously we
are not securing all the information
that is pertinent and needs to be
secured our coverage therefore is not
deemed adequate end quote with respect
to the New York offices conclusions
about a civil rights leader and
associate of dr. King who was also under
close Bureau scrutiny for alleged
subversive ties the director wrote quote
the bureau does not agree with the
expressed belief of the New York office
that blank is not sympathetic to the
party cause while there may not be any
direct evidence that blank is a
communist neither is there any
substantial evidence that he is
anti-communist end quote surprisingly
the bureau did not even comment on the
statement of the New York office that
advisor a was quote not now under CP
discipline in the civil rights field end
quote
sak New York memorandum for 1464 a
detailed comprehensive 163 page internal
headquarters working paper entitled
Communist Party USA Negro question
communist influence and racial matters
dated april 27 1964 includes 14 pages
dealing solely with advisor a but does
not include the information received
from new york just two weeks earlier
that advisor a quote is not now under CP
discipline in the civil rights field and
quote in june nineteen sixty four a
special unit was established in the
bureau's internal security section to
handle exclusively the overall problem
of communist penetration with the racial
movement the memorandum justifying the
special unit pointed out that quote
urgency for the FBI to stay ahead of the
situation is tied to pending civil
rights legislation and foreseeable
ramifications arising out of the complex
political situations in an election year
where civil rights and social
disturbances will play a key role in
campaign efforts and possible election
results end quote in august the bureau
issued new instructions directing the
field quote to broaden its efforts
relating to communist influences in the
racial field end quote the term
communist the field was told should be
interpreted in its broadest sense as
including persons not only adhering to
the principles of the cpusa itself but
also to such splinter and offshoot
groups as the Socialist Workers Party
progressive labor and the like the
director pointed out quote the news
media of recent months mirrored the
civil rights issue as probably the
number one domestic issue in the
political spectrum there are clear and
unmistakable signs that we are in the
midst of a social revolution with the
racial movement as its core the bureau
in meeting its responsibilities in this
area is an integral part of this
revolution end quote the special unit
that had been established in June was
made a
unit e steps taken by the FBI in 1964 to
discredit dr. King the FBI's programmed
to neutralize Martin Luther King as the
leader of the civil rights movement went
far beyond the planning and collection
stage the committee has discovered the
following attempts by the FBI to
discredit dr. King in 1964 one attempts
to discredit dr. King with the White
House as set forth in the preceding
chapter and memorandum summarizing the
contents of the Willard hotel tapes was
shown to presidential assistant Walter
Jenkins in January 1964 and as much as
king is seeking an appointment with
President Johnson the summary of
information obtained from surveillance
at the Willard honolulu and los angeles
hotels was sent to the White House and
to the Attorney General in March 1964 in
order to quote remove all doubt from the
Attorney General's mind as to the type
of person King is end quote a third
memorandum derived from microphone
surveillance was sent to the White House
in July two attempts to discredit dr.
King with the congress in january
nineteen sixty four director Hoover gave
off the record testimony before the
House Appropriations Committee his
precise comments are not known the
briefing paper prepared for his
appearance by the domestic intelligence
division however indicates that director
Hoover was prepared to represent to the
committee that dr. King's advisors were
communists and that dr. King engaged in
improper behavior the directors
off-the-record briefing had an immediate
impact the FBI was soon told that the
members of the committee were quote very
concerned regarding the background end
quote of dr. King and that some members
of the committee felt that the president
should be requested to instruct the USIA
to withdraw a film dealing favorably
with the August 1963 march on
Washington they were reported to be
quote particularly disturbed and worked
at the fact that Martin Luther King
appears to predominate the film end
quote memorandum from NP Callahan to
John Moore 131 64 Carl Rowan told a
committee staff member that shortly
before his appointment as director of us
IA was announced he had been invited to
the White House for a Sunday evening
dinner with the President and mrs.
Johnson to view the film about the March
Rowan said that when the president asked
him if he was going to distribute the
film Rowan replied that if he could not
you have to find yourself a new director
Rowan recalled that the president
replied that's good enough for me Rowan
recalled that after the film had been
distributed he had been called aside by
Congressman Rooney who repeated stories
about dr. King that had been given to
him by the bureau Rowan stated that
Rooney had specifically mentioned the
bugging of dr. King's suite at the
Willard hotel in March 1964 kartha
DeLoach assistant to the director
reported that he had been approached by
representative howard smith democrat of
virginia chairman of the House Rules
Committee according to deloach his
memorandum representative Smith said
that he had heard about the directors
remarks before the appropriations
committee congressman Smith was reported
to have asked for information for a
speech about dr. King on the floor of
the house deloach declined to furnish
the required information but recommended
to the director that congressman Smith
might be useful in the future because a
speech by him about dr. King would be
picked up by newspapers all over the
nation in a television interview several
years later congressman Rooney stated
quote now you talk about the FBI leaking
something about Martin Luther King I
happen to know all about Martin Luther
King but I have never told anybody
interviewer how do you know everything
about Martin Luther King representative
Rooney from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation
interviewer they've told you gave you
information based on tapes or other
sources about Martin Luther King
representative Rooney they did
interviewer is that proper
representative Rooney why not end quote
three attempts to discredit dr. King
with universities in early March 1964
the bureau learned that Marquette
University in milwaukee wisconsin
contemplated awarding dr. King an
honorary degree a memorandum noted quote
it is shocking indeed that the
possibility exists that King may receive
an honorary degree from the same
institution which honored the director
with such a degree in 1950 by making
pertinent information available to a
university official at this time on a
strictly confidential basis we will be
giving the university sufficient time to
enable it to take positive action in a
manner which might avoid embarrassment
to the university end quote the
University official was briefed by an
FBI agent on dr. King's background and
assured the bureau that dr. King would
not be considered for an honorary degree
the result of this FBI project is
unclear in april nineteen sixty four the
FBI learned that dr. King had been
offered an honorary degree by
Springfield College deloach visited
senator Leverett Saltonstall who is a
member of the board of the college in an
effort to convince him to influence the
college to withdraw its offer according
to deloach senator Saltonstall promised
to speak with an official of the college
the college official was reported to
have subsequently visited deloach but to
have said that he would be unable to
uninvite dr. King because the
information concerning dr. King had to
be held in confidence and the Board of
Trustees was governed by liberals four
attempts to discredit dr. King with
churches on jun 12 1964 william sullivan
road
random stating that he had been
contacted by the general secretary of
the National Council of the Churches of
Christ Sullivan reported that quote I
took the liberty of advising him
confidentially of the fact that dr.
Martin Luther King not only left a great
deal to be desired from the standpoint
of communism but also from the
standpoint of personal conduct end quote
Sullivan observed quote I think that we
have sowed an idea here which may do
some good I will follow up on the matter
very discreetly to see what desirable
results may emanate therefrom end quote
Sullivan met again with the general
secretary in mid-december 1964 and
reported that the general secretary had
assured him quote steps have been taken
by the National Council of the Churches
of Christ to make certain from this time
on that Martin Luther King will never
get one single dollar of financial
support from the National Council end
quote Sullivan reported that the
secretary stated that he had discussed
dr. King's background with some key
Protestant clergymen who were horrified
Sylvan also noted that the secretary
said that he also intended to discuss
the matter with Roy Wilkins to persuade
Wilkins quote that Negro leaders should
completely isolate King and remove him
from the role he is now occupying in
civil rights activities end quote on
december eight 1964 the director
authorized the disclosure of information
about dr. King's personal life to an
influential member of the baptist world
alliance bwa so that he could pass the
information along to the general
secretary of bwa and to BW a program
committee members to prevent the
committee from inviting dr. King to
address the BW as 1965 Congress in Miami
Beach the director rejected a proposal
however for quote arranging for certain
bwa members to listen to sources we have
concerning this matter end quote five
attempts to discredit dr. King with the
Pope on august 31st 1964 the FBI learned
that dr. King who is going to be touring
Europe in September might have plans to
visit the Pope Internal Security section
chief Baumgardner observed quote it
would be shocking indeed for such an
unscrupulous character as king to
receive an audience with the Pope it is
believed that if a plan to see the Pope
is in the making it ought to be nipped
in the bud we have considered different
possibilities for meeting this problem
and believe that the best one would be
to have assistant director Malone of the
New York office personally contact
Francis Cardinal Spellman and on a
highly confidential basis bring to the
Cardinals attention the fact that King
is to visit Rome Malone should be able
to impress upon the Cardinal the likely
embarrassment that may result to the
Pope should he grant king and audience
and King his later discredited end quote
memorandum from Frederick Baumgartner to
William Sullivan 831 64 1 the chief of
the Security section recommended quote
if approved assistant director Malone
should personally orally brief Francis
cardinal spellman in accordance with the
attached top-secret summary containing
information about dr. King's private
life this is the same summary we
previously used in preventing Kings
receiving an honorary degree from
Marquette University end quote on sep
tember eighth Baumgardner reported quote
Malone called today and stated that he
had discussed the situation with
Cardinal Spellman over the weekend and
he said that the Cardinal took instant
steps to advise the Vatican against
granting an audience to King cardinal
spellman is going to Rome next week and
thus will be on the same personally and
further ensure that the Pope is not
placed in an embarrassing position
through any contact with king end quote
the FBI's efforts or to no avail the
Pope met with dr. King the director
wrote across the memoranda in four
bring him of that meeting astounding and
I am amazed that the Pope gave an
audience to such a excised by the FBI
the director then initiated inquiries
into the reason for the failure of this
project 6 the attempt to discredit dr.
King during his receipt of the Nobel
Peace Prize on october fourteenth 1964
martin luther king was named to win the
nobel peace prize he received the prize
in europe on december 10th 1965 the FBI
took measures to dampen dr. King's
welcome both in Europe and on his return
home on November 22nd 1964 two weeks
before dr. King's trip to receive the
prize the domestic intelligence division
assembled a 13-page updated printed
version of the monograph which Attorney
General Kennedy had ordered recalled in
October 1963 a copy was sent to Bill
Moyers special assistant to the
President on December first 1964 with a
letter requesting his advice concerning
whether the monograph should also be
distributed to quote responsible
officials in the executive branch end
quote lawyers gave his permission on
December 7th and copies were distributed
to the heads of several executive
agencies information about dr. King's
private life was also made available to
United Nations representatives Adlai
Stevenson and Ralph Bunche the bureau
had learned were being considered as
possible participants at the december
1964 welcome home reception for dr. King
three days after vice president-elect
Humphrey participated in one of the
welcome-home receptions for dr. King in
New York the bureau sent him a copy of
the updated King monograph and a
separate memorandum entitled Martin
Luther King jr. his personal conduct on
december eight 1964 the bureau decided
to brief governor nelson rockefeller
about dr. king's private life and
alleged communists associations
apparently to dissuade the governor from
taking part in ceremonies commending dr.
King for having received the Nobel Prize
upon learning that dr. King might meet
with a certain foreign leader FBI
headquarters instructed the FBI
representative in that country to brief
the proper authorities about dr. King
the United States ambassadors in London
and Oslo were briefed about dr. King
because quote the ambassador's might
consider entertaining King while he is
in Europe to receive the Nobel Peace
Prize and it might be possible to quote
forestall such action by the
ambassador's if they were briefed end
quote the ambassadors in Stockholm and
Copenhagen were also briefed because
quote King is also to visit those cities
end quote on November 10th 1964 the FBI
learned that the united states
information agency was considering
requesting dr. King to engage in a
one-week lecture tour in Europe
following his receipt of the Nobel Prize
Hoover approved the domestic
intelligence divisions recommendation
that usia be furnished with the latest
critical Bureau reports about dr. King
seven attempts to block dr. King's
publications on sep tember 11th 1964 the
FBI learned that dr. King intended to
publish an article in a major national
publication the domestic intelligence
division noted that it did not know
quote what line king will take in the
article or what its specific stands will
be end quote but nonetheless recommended
that quote it would be well to prevent
any publication of his views end quote
the task of preventing publication was
assigned it to an agent with contacts at
the magazine who had four stalled the
publication of an article by dr. King in
that magazine earlier in 1964 the agent
subsequently reported that he had
contacted an official of the magazine in
late-september according to the agent
the official had agreed to endeavor to
assist the FBI and had been briefed
about King but was unable to block
publication because
track Schewel agreement had already been
made the FBI did apparently have some
influence at the magazine however
because a memorandum reporting the
incident concludes quote in connection
with this magazine article by King our
sources have indicated that since he was
awarded the nobel peace prize he has
attempted through some of his associates
to change the magazine article in an
effort to soften criticism made by him
against other civil rights groups and
leaders King feared that such criticism
would cause difficulties in the civil
rights movement the magazine however has
resisted Kings efforts to make these
changes in February 1964 the director
alerted the field offices that dr. King
was writing a new book and noted that
quote it is entirely possible that with
the publication of the book the bureau
may desire to take some action possibly
in the counterintelligence area or
otherwise which may be designed to
discredit King or otherwise neutralize
his effectiveness the field offices were
instructed to maintain information
relating to the preparation and
publication of the book the FBI files
indicate that this information was
collected but it is not clear whether it
was ever used eight attempt to undermine
the National Science Foundation's
cooperation with the SCLC the FBI sent
the national science foundation NSF a
copy of the second printed monograph on
King in order to convince the NSF to
remove the SCLC from the NSF program to
obtain qualified Negro students from
southern schools nine unsuccessful FBI
attempts to locate financial
improprieties in early January 1964 the
chief of the Internal Security section
of the domestic intelligence division
Frederick J Baumgardner recommended that
quote examination of recent income tax
returns of King might well reveal
information which could assist the
bureau in its efforts to discredit King
or new
relies his effectiveness end quote
memorandum from Frederick Baumgardner to
William Sullivan 18 64 on Gardner
observed that it was quote essential
that our current requests of the IRS be
handled in a manner which would provide
for optimum security so that neither
King nor any other unauthorized
individuals may become aware of the
bureau's interest and so that no
embarrassment may come to the bureau and
quote the Intelligence Division
subsequently acquired from the Internal
Revenue Service copies of income tax
returns for the prior five years of dr.
King the SCLC and the Gandhi society an
organization which the FBI stated
augmented the fundraising activities of
the SCLC the Intelligence Division of
the IRS told the bureau that quote IRS
had very carefully scrutinized Kings
returns in the past but had not been
able to establish a cause of action
against him end quote however the IRS
assured the FBI that dr. King's current
returns would be scrutinized quote very
carefully to determine whether any
violations appear end quote none did
undeterred the director informed the
field offices that quote the bureau
believes that more than ever it would be
most desirable to identify any bank
where King may have an account and
consider an audit of such account end
quote one effort to uncover derogatory
information about dr. King was conceived
by the supervisor in charge of the King
case during a golf game a remote
acquaintance of the supervisor mentioned
that he had heard from a friend that an
acquaintance had said that dr. King had
a numbered account in a foreign bank
with a balance of over 1 million dollars
the supervisor suggested to Sullivan
quote if we can prove that King is
hoarding large sums of money we would
have available possibly the best
information to date which could be used
to discredit him especially in the eyes
of his own people we may take the action
to discredit King ourselves through
friendly new sources or the like or we
might turn the information over
to the Internal Revenue Service for
possible criminal prosecution end quote
the plan was approved by director Hoover
and an inquiry was initiated by December
1965 the investigation into a possible
foreign bank account was described by
the director as the most important
presently pending facet of the King
investigation the investigation was
dropped shortly afterward however when
it developed that the initial source of
the allegation informed the FBI that
quote it was merely a wild conclusion
that had been previously drawn by
someone whose identity he does not now
recall end quote f the question of
whether government officials outside of
the FBI were aware of the FBI's effort
to discredit dr. King there is no doubt
that the responsible officials in the
Kennedy and Johnson administration's
were aware of the FBI's come in fill
investigation involving dr. King and the
SCLC and that the wiretaps used by the
FBI to collect its information were
authorized under procedures existing at
the time while there is some question
concerning whether officials outside of
the FBI were aware that the FBI was
using microphones to cover dr. King's
activities there is no doubt that the
product of the microphone surveillance
was widely disseminated within the
executive branch indeed dissemination of
the printed monograph about dr. King to
several executive agencies was expressly
approved by Bill Moyers President
Johnson's assistant in January 1965 the
committee has been unable to determine
the extent to which the FBI's effort to
discredit dr. King and the SCLC by
disseminating unfavorable information
outside of the government was suspected
or known about by government officials
responsible for supervising the FBI the
committee requested the FBI to provide
any information in its possession
reflecting that any presidents or
attorneys general during the relevant
periods were aware of any FBI efforts to
discredit or neutralize dr. King the
bureau replied quote
a review of the king file in response to
other items included in the request and
a polling of all headquarters personnel
involved in that and previous reviews
did not result in the location or
recollection of any information in FBI
HQ files to indicate any of the
aforementioned individuals were
specifically aware of any efforts steps
or plans or proposals to discredit or
neutralize King it is of course evident
that much information developed in the
course of the King case involving him in
activities of interest to the White
House and two representatives of the
Department of Justice including
attorneys general Kennedy and cat Simba
as well as assistant attorney general
Marshall was such that it could
conceivably have been the opinion of one
or more of the above individuals that
such information was being provided to
discredit or neutralize king end quote
Nicholas Katzenbach Burke Marshall
Walter Jenkins and Bill Moyers have told
the committee that they did not realize
that the FBI was engaged in a concerted
effort to discredit dr. King and that to
the best of their knowledge presidents
John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson as well
as Attorney General Robert Kennedy were
not aware of that effort there was no
evidence that the FBI's program to
discredit dr. King was authorized
outside of the FBI there is evidence
however that officials responsible for
supervising the FBI received indications
that such an effort to discredit dr.
King might be taking place and failed to
take adequate steps to prevent it
President Johnson and his attorneys
general were aware at least of Bureau
attempts to disseminate unfavorable
reports about dr. King to the press top
executive branch officials have told the
committee that they had believed that
the FBI had tape recordings embarrassing
to dr. King and that the FBI had offered
to play those tapes both to a government
official and to reporters the evidence
reveals a disturbing attitude of
unconcerned by responsible officials and
a failure on their part to make
appropriate corrective measures
as Nicholas Katzenbach explained to the
committee quote nobody in the department
of justice connected with civil rights
could possibly have been unaware of mr.
Hoover's feelings against dr. King
nobody could have been unaware of the
potential for disaster which those
feelings embodied but given the
realities of the situation I do not
believe one could have anticipated the
extremes to which it was apparently
carried end quote the following
incidents have played a part in our
determination that high officials of the
executive branch must share
responsibility for the FBI's effort
against dr. King one as described in the
previous chapter a summary memorandum
containing information gathered from the
FBI microphone placed in dr. King's room
at the Willard hotel was shown to
presidential assistant Walter Jenkins by
kartha DeLoach on january fourteenth
1964 according to de loaches
contemporaneous account of that meeting
quote Jenkins was of the opinion that
the FBI could perform a good service to
the country if this matter could somehow
be confidentially given to members of
the press I told him the director had
this in mind however also believed we
should obtain additional information
prior to discussing it with certain
friends end quote DeLoach testified that
he could not recall the meeting with
Jenkins but that the memorandum should
accurately reflect his conversation
Jenkins told the committee staff in an
unsworn interview that he did not recall
the meeting described into loaches
memorandum but that he had no reason to
doubt that he had read the summary
memorandum which deloach claims Jenkins
saw Jenkins expressly denied however
that he had suggested that the
information in the summary memorandum
should be leaked to the press or that
either he or President Johnson had ever
suggested that information about dr.
king should be leaked to anyone he added
however that he might have used words to
the effect that quote this is something
people should know about end quote
referring to people in the government
which could have been misinterpreted by
deloach
he did not recall deloach telling him
that the director ultimately planned to
leak this information to certain friends
to a februari fifth nineteen sixty four
FBI memorandum reports a conversation
between Edwin Guffman and Justice
Department's press secretary and John
more of the domestic intelligence
division according to Moore's memorandum
death minh told more that he had heard
that a reporter was preparing an article
about dr. king's alleged communist
affiliations quote death minh stated he
was quite concerned in as much as it
appeared there had been a leak from the
FBI in connection with this matter he
told me the Attorney General had been
most hopeful that there would be no
leaks concerning King from the tone of
Gutman's entire remarks it would appear
he had two thoughts in mind without
actually stating such thoughts these
thoughts were one that the Attorney
General is most anxious that information
concerning King not be released and two
that the Attorney General's connections
with king and his defensive statements
concerning King to Congress in civil
rights hearings would certainly injure
the Attorney General's political chances
for the future he told me once again the
Attorney General was not worried about
what an exposure of King could do to him
he stated he and the Attorney General
are only trying to protect FBI sources
of information end quote memorandum from
John Moore to kartha DeLoach to 564
Hoover wrote next to the last paragraph
quoted there has never been such
solicitude in the past the memorandum
states that Gutman was told quote there
had been no leaks from the FBI
concerning dr. Martin Luther King and
quote and that Gutman had responded that
quote he had no proof whatsoever that
the FBI had furnished information to the
newspapers concerning king end quote
goffman testified that he recalled the
Justice Department had quote suspected
that the information had been leaked by
the FBI end quote when asked the basis
for that suspicion he said that quote we
felt that the question of King and the
association with
advisor a was a matter which was rather
tightly held since it was not something
of general knowledge end quote Beth Minh
said that he could not specifically
recall a reaction by attorney general
Kennedy to this leaked quote except to
be somewhat displeased over it but that
was in a sense all in a day's work and I
don't recall anything specific and quote
death been testified that he did not
recall any further efforts to determine
whether the FBI had in fact leaked the
story goffman testified that desloges
memorandum distorted his remarks Gutman
said that his visit had been motivated
not by concerns about Kennedy's
political future but rather by a concern
to protect FBI sources a memorandum
dated februari fifth nineteen sixty four
my Gutman does not mention a meeting
with more that does contain an account
of a meeting between Gutman and kartha
DeLoach on the previous day quote we
both agreed that it was inevitable that
Kings connections with advisor a would
ultimately become public I told DeLoach
that our concern was over the FBI's
source and that we had no other concern
as to what the Attorney General had said
or what our actions had been in
connection with Martin Luther King
deloach said he thought he should be
concerned in view of what the Attorney
General had said on the subject I
pointed out that anything the Attorney
General had said had been cleared with
the FBI I told deke that our record in
this matter could stand any scrutiny and
that both senator Russell and Senator
Monroe knee had been fully apprised of
the facts last summer or last fall end
quote a memorandum by Courtney Evans
later that day reports that Evans
discussed this matter with assistant
attorney general Burke Marshall who said
that he did not intend to tell the
reporter anything about dr. king but
that quote if he developed anything at
all with regard to the reporter's source
of information he would pass this along
to us end quote Evans memorandum also
states quote
according to information developed by
our Atlanta office on februari 4th 1964
the reporter had in his possession what
appeared to be a blind memorandum
containing information has to adviser
a's alleged connections with the
Communist Party end quote a memorandum
from kartha DeLoach to director Hoover
dated februari eighteen nineteen sixty
four apparently alludes to this incident
and provides some insight into the
political implications of the FBI's
investigation of dr. King according to
de loaches memorandum Walter Jenkins and
Bill Moyers of the White House told him
that Burke Marshall had called and quote
indicated that the Attorney General had
thought it highly advisable for the
president to see the Department of
Justice file on Martin Luther King to
make certain that the president knew all
about king end quote the memorandum
states that Marshall then quote told
Moyers that he wanted to give the White
House a little warning he stated that he
personally knew that the FBI had leaked
information concerning Martin Luther
King to a newspaper reporter Marshall
told Moyers that he thought the White
House should know this in as much as
information concerning King would
undoubtedly be coming out before the
public in the near future end quote
director Hoover wrote next to this entry
marshal is a liar the memorandum reports
that Jenkins told deloach he thought the
Attorney General was concerned with
quote being on record with the president
with the fact that although he has for
political purposes defended King he
wants the President to realize that he
the Attorney General is well aware of
Kings communistic background end quote
the directors handwritten note states
katzenback did his dirt against us
before Warren Commission and now
Marshall is trying to poison the White
House about FBI neither Burke Marshall
nor Bill Moyers recalled the events
described into loaches memorandum
Marshall testified however about an
incident involving the FBI's leaking
information to a reporter
may well have been the same incident
Marshall recalled that sometime in 1964
a reporter told him that the Atlanta
office of the FBI had given him
information unfavorable to dr. King
Marshall said that he phoned the Bureau
official with whom he normally conducted
business and said quote I'm informed by
a reporter that your people in Atlanta
have given this information about Martin
Luther King and that i think it is
outrageous end quote the official at
first said quote I don't believe it end
quote but promised to inquire further he
later called and said quote the director
wants you to know that you're a damned
liar end quote Marshall told the
committee quote it was very difficult
with the bureau because if you said that
they were leaking derogatory information
they would say no we're not end quote
three Bill Moyers President Johnson's
assistant testified that sometime during
the hurly-burly disorganized period
shortly after President Kennedy's
assassination and a prior to President
Johnson's State of the Union address he
heard laughter inside Walter Jenkins
office Moyers inquired and was told by a
secretary that an FBI agent had come to
the office and offered to play for
Jenkins a tape recording which would
have been personally embarrassing to dr.
King Jenkins refused to listen to the
tape a week later the same FBI agent
again came to the White House and
offered to play the tape for Jenkins and
again Jenkins refused to listen to it
Jenkins told the committee that he did
not recall ever having been offered
tapes by the FBI and did not know of
anyone on the White House staff who had
been in addition to this incident Moyers
testified that he had been generally
aware that the FBI reports about dr.
King included information of a personal
nature unrelated to the purpose of the
FBI's investigation when asked if he had
ever asked the FBI why it was
disseminating this type of material to
the White House lawyers responded quote
I don't remember
I just assumed it was related to a fall
out of the investigations concerning the
Communists allegations which is what the
president was concerned about question
did you ever question the propriety of
the FBI is disseminating that type of
information answer I never questioned it
no I thought it was spurious and
irrelevant if they were looking for
other alleged communists efforts to
embarrass king and the president which
is what the president thought Kennedy or
Johnson it would just seemed natural
that other irrelevant and spurious
information would come along with that
investigation question and you found
nothing improper about the FBI's sending
that information along also answer
unnecessary improper at that time no
question do you recall anyone in the
White House ever questioning the
propriety of the FBI's disseminating
this type of material answer I think
there were comments that tended to
ridicule the FBI is doing this but no
end quote Moyer's testified that he had
not suspected that the FBI was covering
dr. King's activities with microphones
although he conceded I subsequently
realized I should have assumed that the
nature of the general references that
were being made I realized later could
only have come from that kind of
knowledge unless there was an informer
and Martin Luther King's presence a good
bit of the time for according to
Nicholas Katzenbach on November
twenty-fifth nineteen sixty-four the
Washington bureau chief of a national
news publication told him that one of
his reporters had been approached by the
FBI and given an opportunity to listen
to some interesting tapes involving dr.
King katzenback told the committee quote
I was shocked by this revelation and
felt that the president should be
advised immediately on November 28th I
flew with mr. Burke Marshall the
retiring head of the Civil Rights
Division to the LBJ ranch on that
occasion he and I informed the president
of our conversation with the news editor
and expressed in very
strong terms our view that this was
shocking conduct and politically
extremely dangerous to the presidency I
told the president my view that it
should be stopped immediately and that
he should personally contact mr. Hoover
I received the impression that President
Johnson took the matter very seriously
and that he would do as I recommended on
the following monday i was informed by
at least one other reporter and perhaps
two of similar offers made to them the
prior week I spoke to the Bureau
official who had been identified as
having made the offer and asked him
about it he flatly denied that any such
offer had been made or that the FBI
would engage in any such activity
thereupon I asked at least one of the
reporters perhaps all of them whether
they would join me in confronting the
bureau on this issue they declined to do
so I do not know whether President
Johnson discussed this matter with mr.
Hoover or what if anything was said
however I was quite confident that this
particular activity ceased at that time
and I attributed it to mr. Johnson's
intervention from that time until i left
the Justice Department I never heard
from any person of subsequent similar
activity by the Bureau and I assumed it
had ceased i should add only this i
believed that the tapes in question were
not tapes resulting from bureau
surveillance but tapes acquired from
state law enforcement authorities and
that such a representation was made to
the reporter at the time end quote
Katzen bach testified that kartha
DeLoach was the Bureau official whom the
reporters had identified as having
offered the tapes Katzen box said that
he had contacted deloach on his own
volition and that he did not tell
DeLoach that he had discussed the matter
with the president he said that when he
asked DeLoach if the bureau had been
offering to play tape recordings
concerning dr. King to reporters deloach
quote told me rather angrily they were
not end quote Burke Marshall when
questioned by the committee about these
events testified that the same two
reporters had also informed him
that director Hoover was offering to
play tape recordings of dr. King he
testified that he had assumed the
reporters quote or telling the truth
that these tape recordings existed and
that they were being leaked by the FBI
end quote he testified that he had not
suspected that the FBI had produced the
tapes itself for microphone coverage but
that he had assumed the FBI had acquired
the tape recordings from southern law
enforcement agencies quote it did not
occur to me that the FBI would go around
placing microphones in dr. King's hotel
the notion that they would plant the
microphone that they had a whole system
of surveillance of that sort involving
illegal entry and trespass and things
like that did not occur to me I would
not have put it past at the local police
but I considered at the time except for
mr. Hoover himself that the bureau was a
tightly controlled well-run efficient
law-abiding law enforcement agency that
it didn't do things like that and
therefore it didn't occur to me that
they had done it end quote Marshall
recalled that he and Katzen Bach had
flown to President Johnson's ranch in
Texas and had told the president that
the FBI was offering the tape recordings
to reporters Marshall said that the
president was shocked and that the
conversation was in the context of it
being very important and a very nasty
piece of business that had to be stopped
Marshall did not know however what
action the president subsequently took
if any and could not remember whether
the president had voiced an intention to
take any specific action deloach when
asked if he had ever discussed the
contents of tape recordings or
surveillances of dr. King with members
of the press testified quote I don't
recall any such conversations end quote
DeLoach did state however that he had
known about the tape recordings of dr.
King he testified that one such tape
recording had been in his office on one
occasion and that quote it was so
garbled and so terrible I mean from the
standpoint of fidelity that I told them
to knock it off and take it back
quote the only record of this episode in
the FBI files is a memorandum by deloach
dated December first 1964 stating in
part quote Bill Moyers while I was at
the White House today advised that word
had gotten to the president this
afternoon that the newsman was telling
all over town that the FBI had told him
that Martin Luther King was excised the
news man according to Moyers had stated
to several people that if the FBI will
do this to Martin Luther King they will
undoubtedly do it to anyone for personal
reasons Moyer's stated the president
wanted to get this word to us so we
would know not to trust the newsman
Moyers also stated the president felt
that the newsman lacked integrity and
was certainly no lover of the Johnson
administration or the FBI I told Moyers
this was certainly obvious end quote
DeLoach testified that he could not
recall the events surrounding this
memorandum Bill Moyers after reviewing
deloach his memorandum testified that he
recalled nothing about the incident
involving the newsman or about cats and
boxes and marshals discussion with the
president he did not recall ever having
heard that the bureau had offered to
play tape recordings of dr. King to
reporters or ever having discussed the
matter with deloach he testified however
that de loaches memorandum quote sounds
very plausible I'm sure the president
called me or he told me to tell him
whatever deloach his document reflects
question did the president tell you that
he understood that the newsman was
saying all over town that the bureau had
been offering tapes answer I can't
remember the details of that you know I
can't tell you the number of times the
president was sounding off at the news
man end quote when asked if it would be
fair to conclude that the president had
complained to Moyers about the news
man's revealing that the bureau had
offered to play tapes rather than about
the fact that the bureau had such tapes
and had offered to play them Moyers
replied quote it would be fair to
conclude that I don't recall if that was
exactly
away the president said it and quote